1 
© 2019 International  Renal Interest  Society  (IRIS)  Ltd. IRIS Ltd. is an independent non-profit  organization  limited  by guarantee in the UK (Registered  
Number  10213173).    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
1. Staging  of CKD based  on blood  creatinine  and SDMA concentration s 
 
 
Staging  is undertaken  following  diagnosis  of chronic  kidney  disease  (CKD)  in order  to 
facilitate  appropriate  treatment  and monitoring  of the canine or feline  patient.  
Staging  is based  initially  on fasting  blood  creatinine or fasting blood  SDMA  
concentration or (preferably) both  assessed  on at least two occasions  in a 
hydrated, stable  patient.  The dog or cat  is then substaged  based  on proteinuria  
and blood  pressure.  
Using  these  criteria, some  empirical  recommendations  can be made  about  the type of 
treatment  it would  be logical  to use for these  cases.  In addition, predictions  based  on 
clinical experience  might  be made  about  the likely response to treatment. 
 
 
Stage        Blood creatinine * 
µmol/l 
                                                                                                                           mg/dl  
 
          SDMA#µg/dl 
Dogs  Cats 
 
Comments  
 
1 <125 
<1.4 
 
<18 <140 
<1.6 
 
<18 Normal blood creatinine or normal or mild increase 
blood SDMA . Some  other  renal abnormality  present  
(such  as, inadequate  urinary  concentrating  ability  
without  identifiable  non-renal cause  (in cats not dogs) , 
abnormal  renal palpation  or renal imaging  findings,  
proteinuria  of renal origin,  abnormal  renal biopsy  
results,  increasing  blood  creatinine  or SDMA  
concentrations  in samples  collected  serially).  Persistently 
elevated blood SDMA concentration (>14 µg/dl)  may be 
used to diagnose early CKD
                                                                                    2           125 –250 
                                                                           1.4 – 2.8 
 
 
    18 - 35             
 
 
 
                                                                                   3          251 – 440 
                                                                              2.9 – 5.0 
 
                                                                        36 - 54          
 
 
 
 
4 >440 
>5.0 
 
>54 140 – 250 
1.6 – 2.8 
 
 
    18 - 25 
 
 
 
251 – 440 
2.9 – 5.0 
 
 26 - 38 
 
 
 
 
>440  
>5.0 
 
>38 Normal or mildly increased creatinine, mild  renal azotemia  
(lower  end of the range  lies within  reference  ranges  for 
creatinine  for many  laboratories,  but the insensitivity  of 
creatinine  concentration  as a screening  test means  that 
patients  with creatinine  values  close to the upper  
reference  limit often  have excretory  failure) .  Mildly 
increased SDMA .Clinical  signs usually  mild or absent.  
Moderate  renal azotemia.  Many  extrarenal  signs may be 
present,  but their extent  and severity  may vary. If signs 
are absent,  the case could  be considered  as early Stage  
3, while  presence  of many  or marked  systemic  signs 
might  justify  classification  as late Stage  3. 
 
Increasing  risk of systemic  clinical  signs and uremic  
crises  
 
 
 
*The  blood  creatinine concentrations  apply  to average  size dogs  – those  of extreme  size may  vary.     #The recommendations for SDMA are based on published literature                                                                                                                 
which utilizes proprietary IDEXX  technology for measuring SDMA. At this time, it is not known if other assays will provide equivalent results.  
(modified in 2023)
2023
2 
© 2019 International  Renal Interest  Society  (IRIS)  Ltd. IRIS Ltd. is an independent non-profit  organization  limited  by guarantee in the UK (Registered  
Number  10213173).  
IRIS Staging of CKD (modified 2019 )  
  
 
Discrepancies between creatinine and SDMA   
 
IRIS CKD staging  is based  on fasting  blood  creatinine  concentration and blood 
SDMA  concentration . SDMA may be a more sensitive marker that is less impacted 
by loss of lean body mass.  
 
DOGS:  
If serum or plasma SDMA is  persistently  >18 µg/dl in a dog whose creatinine is <1.4 
mg/dl (IRIS CKD stage 1 based on creatinine), this canine patient should be staged 
and treated  as an IRIS CKD Stage 2 patient . 
 
If serum or plasma SDMA is  persistently  >35 µg/dl in a dog whose creatinine is 
between 1.4 and 2.8 mg/dl (IRIS CKD stage 2 based on creatinine), this canine 
patient should be staged and treated  as an IRIS CKD Stage 3 patient . 
 
If serum or plasma SDMA is  persistently  >54 µg/dl in a dog whose creatinine is 
between 2.9 and 5.0 mg/dl (IRIS CKD stage 3 based on creatinine), this canine 
patient should be staged and treated  as an IRIS CKD Stage 4 patient . 
 
 
CATS:  
If serum or plasma SDMA is  persistently >18 µg/dl in a cat whose creatinine is <1.6 
mg/dl (IRIS CKD stage 1 based on creatinine), this feline patient should be staged 
and treated  as an IRIS CKD Stage 2 patient . 
 
If serum or plasma SDMA i s persistently  >25 µg/dl in a  cat whose creatinine is 
between 1. 6 and 2.8 mg/dl (IRIS CKD stage 2 based on creatinine), this feline  patient 
should be staged and treated  as an IRIS CKD Stage 3 patient . 
 
If serum or plasma SDMA is  persistently  >38 µg/dl in a cat whose creatinine is 
between 2.9 and 5.0 mg/dl (IRIS CKD stage 3 based on creatinine), this feline patient 
should be staged and treated  as an IRIS CKD Stage 4 patient . 
 
 
 
SDMA  assays  are offered  by a number  of laboratories  throughout  the world.  The 
methodology  used has not yet been standardized  and the recommendations  made  
above  are based  on the proprietary methodology  offered  by IDEXX  Laboratories.  
 
These recommendations are based on current state of knowledge where SDMA 
appears to be a more sensitive indicator of early stage CKD in the dog and cat.  The 
specificity of SDMA has not been tested in large scale prospective studies to enable all 
the factors influencing specificity to be understood. We expect these guidelines to be 
updated wit h further recommendations that will assist the use of SDMA in the 
diagnosis and staging of CKD in the future . (modified in 2023)
SDMA assays are offered by a number of laboratories throughout the world. The methodology used 
has not yet been standardized and the recommendations made above are based on the proprietary 
methodology offered by IDEXX Laboratories. 
These recommendations are based on current state of knowledge where SDMA appears to be a 
more sensitive indicator of early stage CKD in the dog and cat. 
Data are starting to emerge on conditions where SDMA may be elevated without a reduction in GFR, 
where serum creatinine values are unaffected.  Lymphoma in dogs and cats is one such example.  
This illustrates the value of having two biomarkers which are surrogate markers for GFR which can 
be interpreted together. 
Breed and size associated effects on serum creatinine and SDMA
Healthy Birman cats and greyhound dogs have been found to have higher serum SDMA values than 
other breeds.  Both these breeds also have higher serum creatinine values taking some healthy 
individuals (up to 20% of Birman cats) outside laboratory reference intervals. 
For further details on SDMA and creatinine as surrogate markers of GFR please refer to the education article entitled 'Utility of 
Creatinine, UPC, and SDMA in the Early Diagnosis of CKD' which provides more detailed information. 
2023
3 
© 2019 International  Renal Interest  Society  (IRIS)  Ltd. IRIS Ltd. is an independent non-profit  organization  limited  by guarantee in the UK (Registered  
Number  10213173).  
IRIS Staging of CKD (modified 2019 )  
  
 
 
2a. Substaging  by Proteinuria  
 
 
 
The goal is to identify  renal proteinuria  having  ruled out post-renal and 
pre-renal causes. 
 
Standard  urine dipsticks  can give rise to false positives  therefore  practitioners should  
consider  using a more specific  screening  test such as the urine protein to creatinine 
ratio (UP/C) of a species -specific albuminuria assay.   
 
The UP/C should  be measured  in all dogs and cats with CKD , provided  there is no 
evidence  of urinary  tract inflammation  or hemorrhage  and the routine  measurement  
of plasma  proteins  has ruled out dysproteinemias.  Ideally  substaging  should  be done 
on the basis of at least two urine samples  collected  over a period  of at least 2  weeks.  
 
 
UP/C  value  Substage  
 
Dogs Cats  
<0.2 
0.2 to 0.5 
>0.5 <0.2 
0.2 to 0.4 
>0.4 Non-proteinuric  
Borderline  proteinuric  
Proteinuric  
 
Canine and feline patients  that are persistently  borderline  proteinuric  should  be re-
evaluated  within  2 months  and re-classified  as appropriate.  
 
UP/Cs  in the non-proteinuric  or borderline  proteinuric  range  may be categorized  as 
‘microalbuminuric’.  The significance  of microalbuminuria  in predicting  future  renal 
health  is not completely understood  at present.  IRIS’ recommendation  is to continue  to 
monitor  this level of proteinuria  (dogs). Veterinarians might offer treatment for cats 
persistently in the borderline proteinuric or microalbuminuric range considering the 
association with proteinuria of this level and progressive kidney disease in the cat (see 
treatment guidelines) . 
 
Proteinuria  may decline  as renal dysfunction  worsens  and so may be less frequent  
in dogs and cats  in Stages  3 and 4. 
 
Response  to any treatment  given  to reduce  glomerular  hypertension,  filtration  
pressure,  and proteinuria,  should  be monitored  at intervals  using UP/C.  (modified in 2023)
2023
4 
© 2019 International  Renal Interest  Society  (IRIS)  Ltd. IRIS Ltd. is an independent non-profit  organization  limited  by guarantee in the UK (Registered  
Number  10213173).  
2b. Substaging  by Arterial  Blood  Pressure  
IRIS Staging of CKD (modified 2019)  
  
 
 
 
2b. Substaging  by Blood  pressure  
 
 
 
Canine and feline patients  should  be acclimatized  to the measurement  conditions  
and multiple  measurements  taken.  The final classification should  rely upon multiple  
systolic  blood  pressure  determinations,  preferably  done during  repeated  patient  
visits to the clinic on separate  days, but acceptable  if during  the same  visit with at 
least 2   hours  separating  determinations.  Patients  are substaged  by systolic  blood  
pressure  according to the degree  of risk of target  organ  damage,  and whether  there 
is evidence  of target  organ  damage  or complications.  
 
For most dogs  and all cats , the IRIS blood  pressure  substages  are as follows:  
 
Systolic  Blood  Pressure  
mm Hg Blood  Pressure  
Substage  Risk of Future  Target  
Organ  Damage  
<140 Normotensive  Minimal  
140 – 159 Prehypertensive  Low 
160 – 179 Hypertensive  Moderate  
 180 Severely  hypertensive  High 
 
However,  some  breeds  of dog , particularly  sight hounds,  tend to have higher  blood  
pressure  than other breeds.  It is preferable  to use breed -specific  reference  ranges  if 
available.  The classification  of risk of future  target  organ  damage  in “high-pressure  
breeds”  might  be adjusted  as follows:  
Minimal  risk – systolic  pressure  <10 mm Hg above  the breed -specific  
reference range  
Low risk – systolic  pressure  10-20 mm Hg above  the breed -specific  reference  range  
Moderate  risk – systolic  pressure  20-40 mm Hg above  the breed -specific  
reference range  
High  risk – systolic  pressure  >40 mm Hg above  the breed -specific  reference  range. 
 
As with proteinuria,  in the absence  of evidence  of existing  target  organ  damage,  
demonstration  of persistence  of blood  pressure  readings  within  a particular  
category is important.  ‘Persistence’  of increase  here should  be judged  on multiple  
measurements  made  over the following  timescales  in these  blood  pressure  
substages:  
Hypertensive  – systolic blood pressure  160 to 179 mm Hg measured  
over 1 to 2 weeks 
Severely  hypertensive  – systolic  blood  pressure  180 mm Hg measured  over 1 to 
2 weeks.  (modified in 2023)
2023
2b. Substaging  by Arterial  Blood  Pressure  
IRIS Staging of CKD (modified 2019 )  
 3. Revision  of staging  and substaging  after treatment  
 
 
The stage  and substages  assigned  to the patient  should  be revised  appropriately  as 
changes  occur.  For example,  a substantial  increase  in blood creatinine  or SDMA  
concentration  might  warrant  reassignment  to a higher  stage  to reflect  the new 
situation.  
 
Similarly,  if antihypertensive  (or antiproteinuric)  treatment  has been instituted,  the 
patient’s  classification  on re-evaluation  should  be adjusted  if necessary  to reflect  the 
new blood  pressure  (or UP/C)  rather  than the original  status,  with the addition  of an 
indication  that the current  classification  is affected  by treatment.  
 
The following  two examples  illustrate  the process  of revision,  where  ‘treating’  
is used as an indicator  of ongoing  treatment.  
 
Example  1 
 
Euvolemic c at with stable renal function  
Creatinine  200 µmol/l  (2.3 mg/dl)  
SDMA 22 µg/dl 
UP/C 0.32 
Systolic  blood  pressure  200 mm Hg 
Classification  – IRIS CKD  Stage  2, borderline  proteinuric,  severely  hypertensive.  
Same  cat after antihypertensive  treatment  
Creatinine  220 µmol/l  (2.5 mg/dl)  
SDMA 24 µg/dl 
UP/C 0.12 
Systolic  blood  pressure  155 mm Hg 
New classification  – IRIS CKD  Stage  2, non-proteinuric,  prehypertensive  (treating).  
 
Example  2 
Euvolemic dog  with stable renal function  
Creatinine  230 µmol/l (2.6 mg/dl)  
SDMA 39  µg/dl 
UP/C 0.8 
Systolic  blood  pressure  155 mm Hg 
Classification  – IRIS CKD  Stage  3,, proteinuric,  prehypertensive  
Note: As described above in the Discrepancies between creatinine and SDMA  section, 
if blood SDMA is  persistently  >35 µg/dl in a canine patient whose blood creatinine is between 
1.4 and 2.8 mg/dl (IRIS CKD stage 2 based on creatinine), this dog should be staged and 
treated as an IRIS CKD Stage 3 patien t 
Same  dog after antiproteinuric  treatment  
Creatinine  240 µmol/l  (2.7  mg/dl)  
SDMA 42 µg/dl 
UP/C 0.4 
Systolic  blood  pressure  155 mm Hg 
New classification  – IRIS CKD  Stage  3, borderline  proteinuric  (treating),  
prehypertensive.  
 
 
 
 
 (modified in 2023)